{title Other sounds}

In this lesson, we will revisit the {s anusvAra} and the {s visarga}. We will
also learn about two variants of the {s visarga}: the {s upadhmAnIya} and the
{s jihvAmUlIya}.


{h {s anusvAra}}

The {s anusvAra} appears due to sandhi. Usually, it appears when the sound {s
m} is followed by a consonant sound:

{ex

rAmaH rAvaNam hanti > rAmo [rAvaNaM] hanti
Rama kills Ravana.

}

How is the {s anusvAra} pronounced? The {s anusvAra} is a "pure nasal" sound
that has no equivalent in English. You can approximate it by pronouncing {s m}
while pressing your tongue against the roof of your mouth.

However, the {s anusvAra} often becomes many other sounds due to sandhi. If it
is followed by any consonant except for the ones in {s zavarga} ({s za Sa sa
ha}), it usually becomes the closest matching nasal sound:

{ex

saMgaH > saGgaH

saMjayaH > saJjayaH

saMnyAsaH > sannyAsaH

saMbandhaH > sambandhaH

}

And in front of {s yavarga} sounds ({s ya ra la va}), it becomes a nasalized
semivowel.

In general, people don't like writing these nasal sounds out, so they use the
{s anusvAra} as a shorthand.

{note
If you would like to read more about the {s anusvAra}, we recommend
{a[href=http://www.sanskritweb.net/sansdocs/anusvara.pdf] this short monograph}
by Shriramana Sharma.
}


{h {s visarga}}

Like the {s anusvAra}, the {s visarga} also appears due to sandhi. When a word
ends in an {s s} or an {s r} sound, that sound becomes the {s visarga}:

{ex

rAmas > rAmaH
Rama

mAtar > mAtaH
mother!

}

Traditionally, the {s visarga} is often called the {s-dfn visarjanIya}, which
has essentially the same meaning as the word {s visarga}.


{h {s jihvAmUlIya} and {s upadhmAnIya}}

{comm todo show in devanagari}

There are two variants of the {s visarga} that are worth knowing. These
variants are often used in spoken Sanskrit, but they are not usually written
down.

The first is the {s-dfn jihvAmUlIya}. In English linguistics, this is called a
{dfn voiceless uvular fricative}. This sound is like the {s visarga}, but it is
pronounced further back in the base of the throat. The {s jihvAmUlIya}, if it
is used, is used in front of the consonants {s ka} and {s kha}.

The second is the {s-dfn upadhmAnIya}. In English, this sound is called a {dfn
voiceless bilabial fricative.} This sound is similar to the English "f" sound,
but it is not pronounced with any help from the teeth; it is pronounced only
with the lips.  The {s upadhmAnIya}, if it is used, is used in front of the
consonants {s pa} and {s pha}.
