{title For experts}

This longer introduction is meant for advanced readers, such as teachers,
scholars, those who may know some Sanskrit already, or those who simply want to
know more about the guide. This page covers the same information as our
introduction for beginners, but it does so in a deeper and more sophisticated
way. 

If you are already satisfied by our introduction for beginners, you can skip
this page and move on to the next one.


{h Our intended audience}

Our guide is for anyone who wants to read Sanskrit literature and who wants to
learn grammar to make sense of what they read. Grammar is a technical subject,
but we do not expect any background knowledge in grammar, linguistics, or
related fields.

Too often, resources for teaching Sanskrit (especially those written in
English) use a highly technical, highly academic style. This is fine {it per
se}, but as a whole, this technical style carries an implicit message:
"Sanskrit is something only an elite person can know and learn. If you are not
an elite, Sanskrit is not for you."

We reject this idea completely. We believe that anyone who wants to learn
Sanskrit should be able to do so and that it is our responsibility to
encourage and nurture learners rather than throw them into a sea of rules and
jargon.


{h Second language acquisition research}

Our starting point, and the basis for our approach to Sanskrit grammar, is the
main finding from second language acquisition research: acquiring and studying
a language are different mental processes and respond to different techniques.

The realm of acquisition is essentially one of subconscious, implicit, and
organic growth in the learner's implicit mental representation of the language,
which develops through exposure to interesting and level-appropriate content.
Consistent exposure to such content over time is enough to acquire any language
to a very high level, perhaps when paired with the limited and ad-hoc study of
explicit grammar rules.

The realm of study is essentially one of conscious, explicit, and willful
development of an explicit model of the language and its rules, which occurs
through the diligent study and application of various rules, often to a list of
intentionally memorized words. Consistent study of rules is enough to develop
deep mastery but has little relationship to the fast and accurate real-time
interpretation of content in our language of interest.

Although the exact relationship between these explicit and implicit modes of
engagement is still unclear in the research, what can be said with some
confidence is that the neurolinguistic processes involved are different enough
to treat implicit (acquisition) and explicit (studying) approaches to language
as two different activities.

{note In the future, we'll add some links the literature here. For now, we
recommend the works of Bill VanPatten and Susan Gass.}


{h Focusing on explicit grammar}

In light of this division, we see the textbook model as fundamentally flawed
because it attempts to support the divergent activities of implicit and
explicit study simultaneously. If implicit knowledge is knowing how to throw a
ball, explicit knowledge is knowing the kinematic equations that describe the
ball's trajectory. Knowing the calculus of kinematics has some incidental
relationship to throwing a ball, but in a pragmatic sense, neither provides
much insight into the other.

Here is a small example of what we mean. A person {em rides} a horse or a
bicycle or a skateboard or a scooter but {em drives} a car and {em pilots} a
boat or an airplane. The semantics of all three words are similar, but it is
difficult to articulate a specific, explicit rule that accounts for the
difference. Such is the actual, real-world behavior of human language.

Given this divergence between implicit and explicit representations of language
and the approaches necessary to cultivate them, we have focused solely on
building up an explicit representation of Sanskrit. This narrower perspective
is profoundly liberating and allows us to perform one task simply and
effectively.

But perhaps we should address the critical question: why study grammar at all?

Mainly, grammar offers a shortcut to working through ancient Sanskrit
literature. We use the phrase "working through" deliberately: the slow,
word-by-word analysis of a sentence is completely different from the fast,
accurate, and real-time understanding of a sentence that arises through
acquisition.

But there are other compelling reasons to pursue the study of grammar. Grammar
is interesting for its own sake, especially given Sanskrit's long tradition of
linguistics and grammatical study. Grammar can clarify doubts on usage and
meaning for those interested in composition or exegesis. And grammar can
provide structure for those learners who crave structure and certainty.

What are the specific advantages of focusing solely on explicit representation?

The first is that we can omit many of the devices that are shown in the
literature to be ineffective, such as translation drills, conjugation drills,
vocabulary lists, and other kinds of what we might call "language practice."
These devices sap time and energy from the student and are not particularly
effective for acquisition, which is their intended focus in the first place.

The second is that we can sequence our content in an entirely different way.
In the standard textbook, introducing a new topic for discussion is an
expensive and costly thing to do, because the assumption is that the student
must memorize most or all new material that is presented. But more critically,
these topics must be presented with an eye to acquisition. As a result,
important but grammatically unusual features are either unreasonably delayed or
introduced piecemeal and out of sequence. When we are free of these
constraints, we can present Sanskrit's major systems clearly and
comprehensively.

If we omit any devices aimed at acquisition, what is our answer to the
acquisition problem? What do we recommend that learners do?

Simply, we encourage the use of resources aimed directly at Sanskrit
acquisition, such as:

{ul
    {li {a[href=https://en.amarahasa.com] Amarahāsa}: free online stories
    written especially for acquiring Sanskrit.}
    {li Samskrita Bharati ({a[href=samskritabharati.in/] India},
    {a[href=https://samskritabharatiusa.org] US}): Conversational Sanskrit.
    Includes workshops, classes, correspondence courses, and in-person events.}
    {li {a[href=https://www.sanskritfromhome.in/] Vyoma-Saṃskṛta-Pāṭhaśālā}:
    Online Sanskrit lectures in a classroom format.}
}

That said, there will always be those who find anything other than ancient
literature to be a waste of time. Now that our grammar guide has matured, we
are building an assisted reading environment for such learners. Assisted
reading is not an optimal acquisition environment, since the material involved
is far too complex for beginning and intermediate learners; but we see it as a
pragmatic compromise.

{comm

{h Scope and ambitions}

We want to create a standard Sanskrit grammar reference for the computer era.
The modern web page allows an essentially infinite canvas for presenting and
conveying material. Even basic features like color and audio help enormously to
enrich and clarify information. Slightly more sophisticated features, like
full-text search and transliteration, make our examples and explanations even
more accessible. And this is to say nothing of advanced features like
integrated dictionaries, word analysis, and assisted reading.

The initial scope of our grammar guide is to cover the same material as one of
the standard English-language student grammars, such as M. R. Kale's {cite A
Higher Sanskrit Grammar} or A. A. Macdonnel's {cite A Sanskrit Manual for
Students}. Once we reach the level set by these works, we will aim to supersede
them by including more advanced topics, such as commentarial Sanskrit, metrical
analysis, and how to enter the world of traditional grammar ({s vyAkaraNa}).

}

{h Style and intended audience}

Our focus is ordinary people who want to read Sanskrit literature and who want
to use grammar to make sense of what they read. Perhaps some of these people
are comfortable with technical expressions like "partitive genitive" or "past
passive participle" and delight in the intricacies of grammar. (We can
certainly relate!) But to most people, such terms are confusing, intimidating,
and sterile. We want to include as many learners as we can, so we avoid this
complex and highly technical jargon and prefer simple, everyday language.

This does not mean, however, that we dumb down our content.

As an example, one of the common Sanskrit suffixes is {s -ta}. {s -ta} is often
termed a "past passive participle" suffix. This term is problematic in two
ways. First, it doesn't make any sense (unless the reader knows about past
tenses, the passive voice, and participles). Second, it is a poor fit for
Sanskrit specifically:

{ul
{li Many roots use {s -ta} in an {em active} sense (e.g. {s gata}).}
{li Many roots use {s -ta} without any clear past sense at all (e.g. {s zakta}).}
{li The concept of "participles" is much less powerful than just considering the class of Sanskrit verbal suffixes (also known as {s kRt} suffixes) as a whole.}
}

Rather than laboriously explain this suffix using terms that poorly fit the
way Sanskrit works, we can simply say instead that the suffix {s -ta} generally
shows that someone "has acted" or "has been acted on," with a few examples. The
suffix is thus tied immediately to meaningful Sanskrit expressions and to
English counterparts that the reader already knows deeply. And the learner
doesn't need to memorize an awkward and ill-fitting term. 

To put it simply, we make a distinction between {em knowing} Sanskrit and {em
talking about} Sanskrit. {em How} we talk about Sanskrit doesn't matter at all.
What matters is that we communicate useful knowledge to the learner in a way
that they can easily understand and internalize.
