{title Introduction}

In the previous unit, we built on our basic system and learned about how to
use the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} to create different {s tiGanta}s (verbs). As a
reminder, {s tiGanta}s are one of the two major word types in the {cite
Aṣṭādhyāyī}:

{rule

suptiGantaM padam | 1.4.14
sup-tiG-antam padam
That which ends in `sup or `tiG [is called] a `pada (word).

}

We know already that {s tiG} is a {s pratyAhAra} that refers to different verb
endings. {s-dfn sup}, meanwhile, is a {s pratyAhAra} that refers to different
nominal endings. So in the Pāṇinian system, nominals are called {s-dfn
sub-anta} ("ending in a {s sup} suffix").

In this unit, we will learn how the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} creates {s subanta}s. We
will also create complete {s prakriyA}s for a variety of basic nominal words.


{h What is a {s subanta}?}

The term {s subanta} refers to a wide variety of different words, including
nouns, adjectives, and pronouns:

{ex

rAmaH
Rama

zuklA
white

aham
I

}

But perhaps more surprisingly, it also refers to indeclinable words:

{ex

api
also

mandam
slowly

}

Our main focus in this unit will be on nouns and adjectives. But at the end of
this unit, we will return to why indeclinables are considered {s subanta}s and
how this decision makes sense within the Pāṇinian system.


{h Basics of {s subanta-prakriyA}}

Roughly, we derive a {s subanta} as follows. We start with the specific
semantics we wish to express. For example, perhaps we want to express that
Rama is acting as the subject of our sentence.

Based on the meaning we want to express, we choose a stem and an ending:

{ex

rAma + s

}

We then apply extra substitution rules as needed. (For the example above, no
extra rules are necessary.) Then we combine the stem and the ending and apply
normal sandhi rules. The result is a complete Sanskrit word:

{ex

rAmaH

}

Choosing a stem is simple, and we already know how to apply sandhi rules. But
what is more interesting here is how we decide which ending to choose. To
choose an ending, we must understand how the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} models the
meanings of different words. In the lessons to come, that is where we will
focus our time and energy.


{h Nominals for beginners}

{note
The notes below are a brief summary of the Sanskrit nominal system. If you know
Sanskrit already, you can continue to the next lesson.
}

Sanskrit nominals have two main parts: a {dfn stem} and an {dfn ending}. The
stem carries the word's basic meaning, and the ending modifies that basic
meaning to create a complete word.

Sanskrit nominals are highly expressive. They can express three different
{dfn genders} (masculine, feminine, and neuter) and three different {dfn
numbers} (singular, dual, plural). In Western terms, they also express eight
different {dfn cases} (nominative, accusative, instrumental, dative, genitive,
ablative, locative, and vocative).

Sanskrit nouns generally use a single fixed gender. So for a given noun, we
usually have 3 numbers &times; 8 cases = 24 different forms.

{aside

What we call "case" in English does not have a counterpart in {s vyAkaraNa}.
Instead, {s vyAkaraNa} uses the two concepts of {s-dfn kAraka} and {s-dfn
vibhakti}, which we will explore in the next few lessons.

}
